So yeah, while Matt and Rowan are setting up here
, I just want to introduce them.
Because it's not every day that you get to see people
visiting from the future, but you're about to see that
happen right now.
We're very fortunate to be visited by some researchers who are
coming to tell us about the future of science publishing and communication
from the future.
It's a special day today.
Rowan is the CEO and founder of Curvenote,
where he leads the development of tools designed to free scientific communication
from PDFs.
Rowan is also the founder of the Continuous Science Foundation
, a non-profit organization for the next generation of science
communication.
CSF is developing standards to support a more continuous and compos
able model of science.
Rowan is also visiting his alma mater today.
He has a PhD from UBC in geophysics,
computational geophysics, and has received multiple awards for innovative
research dissemination and open education resources, including visible geology,
and interactive geoscience modeling application used by over 1 million
students globally.
Matt Akamatsu is an assistant professor of biology at the
University of Washington in Seattle.
He's also the co-founder of the Discourse Graph
s Project, supported by the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative and Nav
igation Fund.
They're creating systems and software tools for modular research in the
age of AI.
Matt Akamatsu is a recipient of the 2020 Porter Prize
for Research Excellence from the American Society of Cell Biology, the
K99 Pathway to Independence Award, and the Experimental
Foundations Beyond the Journal Award.
Matt Akamatsu received his PhD in biophysics at
Yale, did postdoc at Berkeley, and started at IS
LAB in UW.
Take it away, guys.
Matt Akamatsu: Excellent.
Thank you so much.
I'm absolutely thrilled and excited to talk to you today about
the movement towards modular open science and some of the work that
we're doing at Continuous Science Foundation and Curb Note
towards these goals.
And so today, science is trapped in this sort of paper
-shaped box.
We're communicating our discoveries using print-era concepts that const
rain the way that we communicate, evaluate, and ultimately build
towards scientific knowledge and progress.
But the science that's being produced has changed so massively with
larger data sets, larger scale collaborations, continuous sharing of computational
notebooks and graphs.
The way that we communicate science has really not kept up to
that change.
Our mission at the Continuous Science Foundation is to help move
the open science movement from sort of the sole focus on reading
and access, the open access movement, to a future that
's more focused on utility and reuse that's built on these
same foundations of openness and designed for modern discovery patterns, where
the code, data, protocols, methods are available.
They're interconnected.
They're modular.
They can be composed together through remixing and sort of importing
somebody else's work.
And that really is the ethos of science, is building
upon other people's work, is standing on the shoulders of
giants.
There's an illusion published by Louis Albert Necker in 18
32.
He was a crystallographer.
And this is the Necker cube.
And it's 12 lines on a page.
But if you stare at the bottom, the left sort of
side pops out and it changes and it flips orientation.
If you look at the top, again, there's this
perceptual reversal.
It has the same underlying data, but different interpretations, different
stories that you can tell about fitting those data points together.
And this is the way that I like to think about modular
science, is we have these Lego bricks, these modules of
science, the components, the figures, the equations, the
data sets, the scripts, the visualization routines, those protocols
, questions, claims, evidence, and they're in these
different spaces.
They can live on the floor, scattered.
They can be sorted into buckets or assembled on a shelf as
sort of a published paper.
And so the assembly into a paper, it tells a story
.
It's that narrative that introduces a new concept.
It changes minds.
The components of scientific discourse are bundled together into that sort
of narrative, that traditional way of publishing.
This composed artifact, that paper, that story.
But our scientific ways, our sharing industry, and the standards
today, they demand that you sort of glue that trophy together
when you share it.
That eight page paper with its four sort of paneled figures
, a zip file supplement.
It's all fused together.
And if you want to reuse a figure or a data set
, you have to sort of chisel out that figure.
You have to take a screenshot of it, copy that data
set.
And as soon as you take it out of that piece of
paper, that figure gets amnesia.
It sort of forgets all about its attribution, its
trust, its licensing.
It loses its context.
It loses like that license and that credit behind it.
All of that rich metadata that sort of our scientific commons
are designed to support.
And so these were really the challenges that prompted the first wave
of modular science.
Many people recognize that it's not enough to share an advertisement
of your experiment.
You should share the data and the methods and the code underlying
it.
And so the prescription in 2010 was for modular science.
It was pretty simple.
You just break it into pieces and you put it into buckets
.
And you put it in the appropriate repository for that component.
So protocols.
io, you share your protocols.
Figures go to fig share.
Software heritage is the place that you share your code.
A specialized data repository for genomics or microscopy data.
And Zenodo can sort of take up all of the rest
.
And so these are the buckets of modular science.
The digital repositories for archiving, tagging, organizing
your data, protocols, code, and figures.
And they really are actually excellent buckets.
They exist fit for purpose for science.
But they're largely designed for after the work is done.
When you're starting to organize it, package it up,
and put it in these places.
So tidying up your workspace, putting the blocks away,
and sort of pointing them from your glued together trophy on a
shelf.
And they're structured.
They're organized.
They strive to be these sort of tidy, curated spaces.
And you fill out your intake form, specify your authors,
license, description, your ORCID, your ROAR
, your funders.
All of these references.
And it's really a very high bar to share work.
And if you have some visualization code or a scratch script that
you really know is the secret of how your work hangs together
, it's like the bar for sharing that is so high
.
So all of those small things sort of get lost.
They don't fit together on the shelf with that glued together
trophy.
And they don't really amount to enough to justify the investments
to sort of formally request bucket status.
And that's the aggregation of all of these small components
of sort of the workflows and scripts of science fitting together.
That's where the tacit knowledge of science lives of all
of those workflow scripts of saying, yeah, I've seen
that before.
I'll grab you the notebook or I'll grab you that
script or I've seen that last year and that's a
dead end.
And so these buckets are sort of both that very high bar
and they're not fully aligned with science and with research,
which is often much more much less structured than sort of the
scientific method like laid out on a piece of paper step by
step.
That's that's how it works.
It's much more fluid, much more serendipitous
.
You need to access all of the pieces to build new things
and you sort of dump the buckets out onto the floor.
And this this is the space to build, to experiment,
to support that sort of serendipity of science.
Maybe the equivalent of sort of leaving of that Petri dish
out and Fleming discovering penicillin in 1928
.
Or maybe you have like slightly better lab hygiene protocols and setups
and software so that you don't step on the pieces of
Lego on the floor, but sort of have that goal to
access those pieces readily and build them and put them together so
that you can pull data from someone's lab in Tokyo,
pull a protocol from Germany and remix them with your ideas to
build something new, to learn something new, to discover something
new.
And so these these are the the three states of scientific components
and modularity.
They're on the floor, that chaos, that serend
ipity, that remixing in the buckets organized by types
, protocols, data, repositories, that's that first
wave of modular science that was really tackling that problem.
Or they're on the shelf, that composed artifact, that
paper, that story.
And all of these are are right.
They're they're correct.
They're like good ways that are fit for purpose for that
task.
And they're sort of that different side of that necr
acube, that that illusion that flips and pops in and
out for that right time that you need it for teaching or
learning or discovering or building.
And so I think this this is what the next wave of
modular science is about, is not just sort of breaking it
apart to share, which is sort of somewhat unnatural, especially
if you have these sort of smaller artifacts that don't fit
on a shelf sort of behind that trophy, is thinking about
those sort of aggregate components that that are the connective space
of science.
And sharing those, there's such a high bar for for
sharing those in in this sort of first wave.
And it ends in this sort of disconnection, this constellation
of research artifacts, where you have to tell a fable
to imagine how it's all connected together, instead of actually
connecting it together.
And the second wave of modular science is about improving that packaging
experience, working with the researcher as they're on the floor
, as they're building, that is where the modularity
emerges.
You don't write a manuscript top to bottom 10,000
unbroken words, one after another, with perfect figures,
you iterate on the figures, you iterate one panel at a
time, one script at a time, asking for feedback in
this sort of modular composable way with with collaborators, and
building up from that modular work.
And it's a connected graph of discourse or computational narratives,
supported by modern tooling like Obsidian or Mist Markdown,
that can define the context of that data and how it travels
together.
And the result of all of this is sort of this multiplic
ative additive compounding effect of how these things come together.
And so I think it's also not worth losing sight of
the end goal of this is actually to tell some of these
new stories.
These compositions are the point of science.
And maybe we should aspirationally have these less be less like
trophies on a shelf behind glass, but shared a little
bit more continuously a little bit earlier.
And here there's like this meta study that is crying out
from here of how teapots are associated with the Lego
bricks on the shelf that you actually want to pull these out
and put them together and try something new.
And so that that is like a very different thought of modular
science than this first wave.
So instead of thinking about the figures off on their own,
we're thinking about the structure of these artifacts inside.
So not import figure, but import figure from a paper.
And that can compose all the way down so that you can
get inside of these artifacts and bring modularity with you as
it's traveling throughout the ecosystem.
And so I, I just want to give a flavor of
sort of the syntax of how we're thinking about, about
modular science in this second wave.
And it really does, I think the Lego metaphor works well
here because it does have these specific ways that science fits together
.
This is the schemas and the standards and the pieces behind
research of how they click together that you can make very different
things.
And there isn't glue here.
You're also able to take them apart and put them into
different compositions.
And that is the goal of the project out of the Contin
uous Science Foundation called Open Exchange Architecture, OXA or
OXA.
They are new standards for modular and composable scientific content.
And you can learn more about that at OXA.
dev.
And this is a large project that's bringing together a lot
of existing players in the scientific ecosystem, all the way from
authoring tools like Korto or Mist Markdown that
people might have started to use to publishers like eLife for
traditional manuscripts or Open Archive for preprints, as well
as licensing organizations like Creative Commons who are involved in sort of
bringing all of these together into a modern computational, complete modular
and composable format that can actually support our scientific narratives.
And so some of the principles that we have for OX
A is, of course, it's open.
It's a JSON schema-based representation.
It's a tree-based representation of the scientific content specifically
.
And so this is anything from the paragraph, citations,
figures, equations, or code.
It is extensible to these sort of new types of data
, composable so that you can bring one person's work
and compose it inside of yours, typed down, very similar
to the sort of the at proto schemas, and thinking
about that interoperability modularity.
And throughout all of this, really thinking about the computation as
a first class citizen within this schema itself.
It's also going through, we're thinking at this stage
a lot about the governance and how we're actually building this
up.
And so there's an RFC process that actually goes through
and we're beginning this movement, I think, in the
right way from that perspective, so that we're actually building
this up and being fit for purpose all the way through.
And it also, of course, has an at proto recognition
on that.
So you can transfer out of this much more schema, sorry
, tree-based schema, which is sort of the native
representation of OXA, to something that's a little
closer to what at proto works with, which is a fac
et-based piece where you can actually have some of those
annotations, which might be a citation or an additional abbrevi
ation or something that is deeply nested inside of this schema
, but can be distributed from sort of a social perspective.
And so there's a lot of thought going in here.
And this is definitely early stages.
And so we're inviting a lot of people to come,
be involved in sort of the definition of the schema as it
starts to exist.
And I want to just give a couple different flavors with my
Curvenote hat on about some of the case studies that
we're bringing to bear with these ideas.
And so this Elemental Microscopy is a journal that
we're working with that's trying to do something a little
bit more exciting than just sort of a picture on a page
with a blowout of that sort of one and a half
terabytes of data is you should actually be able, similar
to Google Maps, to just like zoom into it directly as
you're reading, is we have all of these sorts of
visuals out there already.
Scientists are using them in their day-to-day work
.
So we should be able to compose those into the ways that
we are sharing science.
And this is speaking to that modularity as well.
That one and a half terabytes doesn't live inside of
the paper.
It does live in its appropriate bucket, but it can be
composed into the way that we share and read and communicate science
.
So thinking about not a constellation of research objects that we're
sort of painting the stars, but actually showing you how it
all fits together.
The other project that's one of the other projects that Cur
venote is working on is a partnership with Open Archive
.
Open Archive is the parent organization around Bio Archive and
Med Archive, which are the largest biomedical preprint servers
.
And we are currently reprocessing 8.
1 terabytes of articles to this new format.
And so this is something that's ongoing right now.
There's about half a million preprints that are coming together
.
And this is going to support more exciting reading experiences where you
can hover over a figure and bring that in.
You can dive into that right away.
And so this is within the context of a single article that
you can bring that modular piece to bear in the context and
bring that sort of forward in your way of working.
But that also should be able to exist across
research articles.
And so some research articles, if you hover over them,
are closed access and they're not that exciting.
But if they're open access or a preprint, you
should be able to bring the figure from that to bear right
as you're reading.
And so really thinking again about this sort of modular composable
way of working that really can improve both the reading experience of
a researcher.
Like if if you have a reference that says see figure three
in someone at all, like you have to scroll to the
bottom of the page, download the PDF, jump through a
paywall, bring it up in your reference manager, scroll
to page 50 and actually get the the figure there.
And by the time you've got there, you've lost
all of your context and machines often can't follow all of
that work either.
And so this, this I think is thinking about that sort
of next wave of modular science, both from the user experience
standpoint, the schemas that are supporting it, as well
as the ways that sort of the community can get involved throughout
.
And so not thinking about trophies on a shelf that are
glued together, but pieces that you can take.
And those are a starting point for the next analysis, lowering
the barrier to entry for inclusion in these buckets that you can
maybe package these up with the pieces that you are sharing and
still be indexed in, in these different ways, as
well as supporting researchers as they're working on the floor with
better tooling, better graph based waves of working better computational notebooks
that actually support the organization and communication of all of these results
.
And so that is, I think the way this new wave
of modular science is not saying one of these ways of working
is better than the other, but it's flipping that perspective
back and forth between all of these different ways of working all
at once.
And so I think the other really exciting piece that was talked
about at the start as well is this is our time.
This is our semblance of this space and there is so
much going on that we can actually affect massive change in the
way that science is done.
So I am Groen Cockett.
I'm the CEO of Curvenote and also one of
the co-founders of Continuous Science Foundation and follow
me on Blue Sky.
So thank you very much.
- Thank you very much.
- Thank you.
- I think we're doing a few times before.
- Hello, yes
, great.
- Hello, yes.
- Great.
- - -
Well, thank you
, Rowan, for such an inspiring talk.
Rowan and I first met about this time last year at
a Continuous Science Foundation workshop that Rowan organized in Ban
ff in which we converged at this idea of modular research
as a new paradigm for open science.
And so I'll show today how our research lab at the
University of Washington uses modular science principles for interoperable and
extensible open research practices.
- Why don't I turn this down a little bit?
There's a little bit of an echo.
Or is it this?
Turn that off.
Better?
Better.
Yes.
So my name is Matt Akamatsu.
I'm an assistant professor of biology at the University of Washington
.
And today I'll show how discourse graphs help our labs to
enable modular and interoperable research practices.
So I started my lab at the University of Washington about three
and a half years ago.
Here we are on the right.
And I've also co-founded the discourse graphs project,
which is an open science and collaboration, tooling, software development
platform, and organization.
And through these two organizations, we design, build, and
test new ways to do scientific research that enables better, faster
research collaboration and sharing of our research outputs in real time.
These projects are motivated by many of the systemic barriers to research
collaboration that Rowan just described that have been exacerbated now
that generative AI is a regular participant in the scientific research
and publishing process.
That is best exemplified by this scandal that broke out sometime
last year in the International Conference on Learning Representations, where
it became apparent that the majority of, or many of the
submissions as well as reviews for this conference, for these conference
papers on machine learning, were entirely generated by low-quality
AI that didn't make any sense.
And so that caused this researcher to say we're entering an
era in which distinguishing real science science from low-quality
AI will be essential.
An AI tool did an analysis of these reviews and submissions that
indicated that over 20% of the submissions were entirely AI-
generated and another large percentage of them were moderately AI
-generated.
And so it says it seems that 21% of these reviews
may be AI.
But that leads to the same type of question, how strongly
should we trust this particular report and this tool?
So the caveat, LLM-generated text detection
is not perfect.
So this is illustrating that we need some better grounded piece
of information, some evidence to help us to weigh how much
we should trust this measurement and by extension how much we should
trust these scientific research submissions that up until now have been the
substrate for how you share your research communication.
But that's under tremendous strain because of large language models.
So we wonder, in this day and age, what is
the appropriate source code for scientific communication in the age of AI
?
And I pose this question tongue-in-cheek because
, as many of you know, the role of source code
itself has changed quite a bit over the past year in programming
because it now can be freely generated by AI and regenerated
from specific instructions.
So we expect the same transformation may occur for scientific research communication
, where up until now the state-of-the-
art has been this long-form narrative PDF that's dozens
of pages long, compiles five years worth of work,
and several dozen results into this single document with a linear auth
orship list.
Likely, we'll need some other substrate for communicating our
research that is smaller than this long-form journal PDF,
but larger than the individual raw data or text.
And our principles of operation, as Rowan introduced, are
that we'd like this system to be reusable so that we
can build upon different elements of the research process and synthesize
them into living theories of knowledge about our favorite corner of the
natural world.
We need each element to have clear provenance and attribution
, and we'd love for it to center human decision-
making in an era when the AI scientists are getting increasingly powerful
.
Absent a deliberate design for collaboration, we might find ourselves
out of a job for the fun parts of doing science.
Therefore, our goal is to decouple research into modular
elements that each can be reused, cited, and synthes
ized.
Those atomic elements are questions, claims, and evidence, which
we connect into a graph.
This data model comes from the science philosopher Stephen Tullman
, who argues that science is less a series of monolithic
truths and more a series of claims that are supported by more
or less evidence.
And over time, you gather more evidence, some of the
claims go away and new claims arise.
And so we'd like to be able to capture not only
the claims, but the evidence that supports them so that we
can update them.
And this particular project is the product of a five and a
half year collaboration between myself and human computer interaction researcher Joelle
Chan at the University of Maryland.
And together, we build both the information model and plugins to
popular note-taking software so that we can run our labs
on this modular research paradigm and test what works, what genuinely
helps the advancement of our lab's research.
So to this end, we've built discourse graphs, which
are both a protocol and an app for interoperable knowledge
exchange.
Here's the information model.
We take our scientific arguments and projects and decouple them
into questions, claims and evidence and connect them into a graph
.
The question is the unknown that you'd like to make known
with your research project.
The claim is the current answer to the research question, which
it wants to be supported by one or more lines of evidence
.
Each piece of evidence is a specific observation from your work with
an outcome and it's grounded in a single study or experiment
or at least a published research article.
The article grounds the evidence.
The evidence supports or opposes the claim and the claim,
when incomplete, always motivates a new experiment that you want to
do driving the research research cycle forward.
I'll give a historical example.
70 years ago, there were two competing claims for what is
the three-dimensional structure of DNA.
Is it a double helix or is it a triple hel
ix?
Where are the negatively charged phosphates in this DNA helix
?
And there was no evidence to distinguish between these two competing claims
until Rosalind Franklin's famous x-ray diffraction
experiment showed this very characteristic diffraction pattern that gave us some
information about what the spacing is likely to be between these DNA
bases and that supported the double helix model for the structure
of DNA.
So in this discourse graphs framing, Rosalind Franklin could
have posted this single result to the group, to the group
's personal data server, I suppose, and said, "
This is a result.
It's reproducible.
I'm going to show you -- I'm going to tell
you the observation.
I'm going to tell you the -- I'm going to
give you the associated figure and a little methods context.
Let's figure out what it means together." And in order
to strengthen their claim that DNA has a double helix structure
, Watson and Crick would have needed to cite Franklin's
piece of evidence.
Otherwise, it would remain an untested claim.
And what I love about this model is that it creates an
automatic attribution structure that appropriately credits Franklin's contribution to this
discovery over the course of just making a stronger scientific argument.
Alternatively, in a world absent evidence, the modelers could
instead request that somebody do this DNA diffraction experiment because it
's important for their model.
And then some -- an experimentalist might claim that experiment,
carry it out, tell them what the result was.
And then the modelers get some credit for their intellectual contribution
to the idea.
And the experimentalists get their credit for doing the work.
In both cases, the attribution trail isn't some after
-the-fact accounting.
Instead, it's baked into the ongoing research process.
So we got very excited about this model and whether it might
support our researchers' everyday work and also allow for this natural
sort of self-organizing system for modular science.
So we've spent the last number of years developing open source
plug-ins for some of our favorite note-taking apps
like Obsidian or Rome Research in which I'm presenting in
order to make life easier for the researchers in our labs.
These plug-ins help grad students, postdocs,
undergraduates to orient their projects in context with open questions and
key hypotheses and keep them on track towards the question that they
decided they wanted to answer.
It allows them to inventory super early stage results as soon as
they think they might have an observation and share them with the
team every week in our group meetings and then synthesize those
results into scientific arguments and scientific stories in context with the published
literature so that they have rigorous and updatable stories of the
state of knowledge for their research field.
And so we've found that running our labs on this information
model has enabled large-scale collaboration, coordination, and sense
-making among members of our lab.
So here's a couple examples showing how using discourse graphs as
our lab's graph-based shared lab notebook and meetings documentation
and storyboard for our manuscripts and stories has led to a
richly interconnected graph of questions, claims, claims, and
evidence that our lab runs on.
In this visualization, each line represents a single reference of one
person's question, claim, or evidence by another person in
our 10-person lab that grows over the three and a
half years of our lab's creation, which shows how around
3,500 of these cross-author references have been generated
, indicating that we are building off of each other's intellectual
work in real time.
This is both evidence from the published literature as well as new
evidence from our ongoing experiments and simulations.
And we're even building theories of knowledge where one person's
evidence supports somebody else's hypothesis.
Here's another example showing that we're not only sharing knowledge
, but we're also distributing the work, the requested experiments
.
In this plot we show the transfer of a requested experiment.
Somebody says, "You know, this analysis experiment is a
good idea.
Somebody should do it.
I don't have time to do it right now, but
either me in the future or an undergraduate will come in,
see this dashboard, claim it, and say, "This
is how I can contribute to important problems in the lab."
And so this diagram shows how the transfer of experiments that were
requested and then claimed, often by a different person in the
lab, and some of which culminate in a new observation
that completes the experiment.
I have the result.
I have the analysis.
Here's the outcome.
We can close this issue.
And so this show, and the other thing I love about
this transfer is that a number of these posts and claiming and
completion of experiments were done entirely without my knowledge until they were
completed, which as the principal investigator gives me a lot of
assurance that researchers are getting the mentorship that they need from each
other, finding important work to do, and having a very
clear trail of who did the work work in a self-
organizing fashion.
So in this case, something like 30% of these issues
, requests for experiments, were claimed.
40% of them yielded a result, and 15%
of those happened between different lab members.
So with this proof of concept within our own labs, we
now seek to bring these tools in a pilot program to other
research labs throughout North America.
So we're halfway through a user pilot supported by the Chan
Zuckerberg Initiative and the Navigation Fund, in which we
develop these plugins so that they are easy to use for these
research labs and organizations so that they may better track their experiments
, post research updates, and synthesize their work into their
ongoing manuscripts, etc.
What we found so far is that these discourse graphs help researchers
, for example, synthesize results into scientific stories in context
with the literature.
First, in this non-linear format, akin to the
floor of Lego bricks that Rowan just described, here we
're looking at an open canvas where the researcher in Obsidian
can share these individual experiments, results, meaning evidence, and
claims in this open graph along with whatever notes he might want
to include and connect them into this non-linear graph.
He calls this his murder board or his whodunit
pertaining to his research question that is grounded in the individual evidence
from the literature and from his ongoing experimental observations.
And he uses it to plan what is the right experiment to
do next and communicate to the rest of his lab what his
findings are.
We're making it possible for him to share individual results with
collaborators or wider networks of researchers, but it's also possible
to compile these individual results into a figure for a traditional manuscript
if that's what you need to do.
So here's an example from our lab where an undergraduate is
compiling the figures for his manuscript starting with the question.
Each panel of the figure corresponds to one piece of evidence.
It's an observation that you put there because it's strengthening
your overall claim that you're trying to make in the figure
.
So using discourse graphs demystifies the process of compiling
or recompiling your scientific narrative from the underlying evidence.
We've found so far that discourse graphs help researchers in the
pilot labs and in our own labs to do the following.
It helps them think like a scientist.
People report through qualitative research that we're doing with Joelle
's lab that they have found huge improvements in their thinking and
doing of science.
And even when they're not using the plug-in,
it helps keep them in the frame of mind.
They call it the discourse graphs frame of mind where they remember
their goal is to be addressing questions by providing evidence that supports
or opposes their hypotheses.
It also helps them feel like a scientist, saying that they
now have the confidence to share a result without having to claim
that they have the be-all end-all interpretation of
that result.
They say this is the observation.
Let's all figure out together what you think it means.
I'm just an undergraduate.
And so now they have the confidence to share their results much
earlier than they would have otherwise given that they're sharing it
within a trusted environment of their lab or their collaborators.
Here's another researcher saying that now I have a motivation because
I feel like I have permission to use the words "hy
pothesis" supporting my hypotheses because they're now baked
into the way that I'm sharing my work.
So now I can use those words and that makes it much
easier and makes me feel like I'm a scientist.
And so it feels like it's true progress where I'm
not just sort of collecting data, but I'm generating novel
observations instead of just where do I start.
And very excitingly, we have an early indication that some
researchers feel that documenting their research in discourse graphs better reflects the
true nature of doing science than writing up narratives and making slides
hows.
So they say converting to this kind of structure is maybe more
aligned with what the actual process is like of answering research questions
that can be complementary to writing up your long-form narratives
, but may end up being more useful and truer to
the way that the process of science that people actually want to
be carrying out, particularly in collaborations.
I'm also excited about how having this modular graph structure makes
it easy for our research knowledge base to interact with AIs
so that they can give us attributable synthesized information from
our lab knowledge base.
So here I'm plugging in our lab graph into our favorite
AI, Claude, and gave it some instructions for how
it can navigate our graph and asking it to give me an
update on on recent results so that we can have a real
-time view of the key results in the lab and a
type of real-time research assessment.
So it says here are the recent results from the lab and
I'll give you some links, I'll tell you who
did it, I'll tell you how important it is,
and we can, you know, vibe code or any arbitrary
visualization or dashboard that we think might be relevant.
And this, I think, reflects the the heterogeneity
of algorithms that ATProto enables too, where once you
and your community decide what the relevant metrics or what's the
most important thing, then you can show for your community the
highest relevance, in this case individual results connected to the key
questions, motivated by a piece of evidence that I collected that
's in my one of my postdoc papers and connected to
an undergraduate's result as well that you can freely navigate through
the graph and then also contribute to.
We now can share our research not only in long-form
narratives but also in these modular research elements which we call the
evidence bundle.
The evidence bundle is a data object that contains the observation,
the key figure, and a little bit of methods context and
optionally the the raw data and the plots that led to
the creation of this plot, which get remixed and re
used in different contexts.
The evidence bundle was born in my lab notebook in Rome and
I use our discourse graph software to inventory it and update it
over time.
It then becomes a persistent object in the lab's graph with
enough information for the rest of the lab to understand it,
which we can then connect into these mini discourse graphs that support
our ongoing hypotheses.
We put this in the repository somewhere and then we can use
it to compile either a traditional narrative or multiple narratives in different
venues for different audiences and then we can also post it on
on blue sky.
Right now as a prototype this evidence bundle lives in gith
ub but there's no reason it couldn't live on a
personal data server and then take advantage of the many apps and
tools that many of you in the audience are building and I
would love to do that together.
So we are very excited about the promise for modular research as
a way to support people's ongoing science.
We think for it to take hold we need to have the
attribution of your modular research contributions be more valuable useful and
accurate than the current method of counting up the authorships in
journal articles.
So we are working on that technology and on demonstrating the ability
to do modular research attribution.
So here you might have two labs that are working on a
similar question.
We'd like to make it possible if they each have their
own discourse graphs for each person to be able to submit one
result and have it cited by the other lab or their larger
community and one lab can request an experiment.
Each result has shared upon metadata in a schema of the type
that Rowan just described so that you can attribute each person
's contribution in a way that initially requires some access control so
that they're willing to share their work individually and then is
more widely shareable.
We're making this possible in a workshop catalyzing modular
interoperable research attribution and in a workshop in Ireland
in June where we're bringing together tool builders and researchers to
make a proof of concept a system by which you can trade
individual research elements and Ronan and I have co-founded
a community of organizations called the Kairos Network which is
meant to support different tool building organizations that have shared values that
are committed to interoperability so that modular research can be
carried out with the hope that it becomes a persistent and sustainable
source of support for this tool this new tool building ecosystem.
So in summary by decoupling research into its atomic elements
questions claims and evidence and connecting them into a graph we enable
trainees experts and AIs alike to make discrete contributions to shared
research collaborations in a way where you can see the direct proven
ance you can attribute each person's contribution and you can build
upon it in a way that leaves space for each researcher to
be recognized and allows them to work collaboratively with AIs
and with each other and preserve the most fun parts of doing
research together.
Thank you
.
Okay, that was excellent.
Can you hear me?
Is this mic?
So any question?
And Rowan?
Okay, I'll start.
Go Crop.
Can I just before
just for the streaming uh the question was about can we get
the research funding organizations
on board are summarized yeah so
I do think there are there is movement on the research funding
agencies Gates Foundation came out with some changes about a year ago
focusing more on preprints than the sort of journal artifact that
was followed through by Howard Hughes Medical Institute about a month and
a half ago and then Michael J Fox Foundation just like two
weeks ago has changed their policy so there is actually movement that
's happening in that space one of the things that I do
at Curvenote is we run internal workspaces for
Howard Hughes Medical Institute for example and a large part of that
is actually compliance dashboards for the open access researchers so that
they can have different metrics on on sort of how they're
assessing research that can then like have some of these like different
skews towards data or evidence or sort of the actual mechanisms
and process of science rather than sort of the end artifact so
I do I think there's room to be optimistic sort of
up and down this the stack of research all the way up
to these sort of funders all the way at the end
okay who's next moving along
yes so
could you repeat the question uh so yeah there's most of
scientific research is actually closed access a lot of it more recently
is moving towards open access but there are still a lot of
paywalls in this space from
my specific focus i'm like looking forward like the future is
open the future is open access and sort of building these modular
tools around that and using those to reinforce practices in that space
that allow people to sort of share openly as well and so
i think that's that's my goal personally
so i think also and maybe matt you want to talk about
this because i think there is like that early stage where you
are in a much more trusted environment and you have these sort
of circles of trust that you want to build i think it
's not um appropriate necessarily to share everything openly all the time
for everyone and so i definitely think that we need these like
ways of working that support tight-knit trusted communities and
that that is especially important yeah we we think you can you
can reuse these individual like panels from from an existing figure from
an existing published paper and reuse it for your own purposes in
your sort of collaborations knowledge graph as a sort of fair reuse
example and as rowan was saying more and more of these
published papers even if they end up in a closed journal have
an open preprint alternative and so the more accessible that each
preprint becomes the more that becomes the the genuinely useful unit
for knowledge yeah
for us it's making
sure you have the right time stamp and making sure that you
can you can see which reference that you made we haven't
found it necessary to have some sort of auto update yet like
a notification is is is is enough at this
stage um so for the the current scope that we're looking
at we found it sufficient to have this persistent object and you
get an update if the if it changes because we're not
trying to algorithmically generate conclusions yet i think so long as
there are timestamps and you can scroll forward and backward in
the history of the result that will get us a lot of
the way there a lot of the way there is
yeah so so one part is in structuring the the content
so that it's clear that there should be a place where
there's methods context and then you you share it and you
talk about it in a way that you think other people in
your lab will be able to understand and right now in a
relative freeform manner you can also include comments uh in a
way that we're just sort of hacking into like locally for
for rome research but i think it's important to have
basically the conversation and those those comments connected into uh the the
the the back story so right now for for every app that
we use we just allow the sort of threaded conversation to be
to be associated and it sort of gives it's almost like
an extended part of the lab notebook that you then eventually sort
of close and you can see the history even though most people
are going to just like in wikipedia want to see
that yeah yeah right now what we find is that so for
example there was an undergraduate who joined the labs looking for a
project to work on and he had heard in lab meeting from
this other uh postbac researcher and thought i like how
this person works let me go see if they have any open
issues and that is an excuse for me to go message him
on slack and then talk to him in person and get more
of the in-person mentorship so the the matching happened through
the app and much of the mentorship was still live in person
informal
yeah
so the question is can other plans to allow people to publish
into the app proto system uh and yes so we're designing
the systems for people to be able to share from one graph
to another and then uh more publicly as well um so we
have a draft schema uh for for sharing peer-to-
peer and we have a draft lexicon i learned
yesterday that isn't in use yet um but the the hope
is during this in-person modular attribution workshop we make
it uh technically possible and show examples of people being able to
share um keeping in mind that the first the majority of use
cases at first are this peer-to-peer so
so long as there's some you know access controls between people
's uh pds's i think it'll it'll take
off and then you like flip the switch when when they're
ready to and
you like to share it more openly so there's there's
at some point there's malicious actors and there's motivation for
that uh scarcity of jobs reputation etc and uh so you know
stealing attribution and stuff i mean there's there's mechanisms
these people have tried to use for this from back and forth
right so uh um i guess what i haven't heard is
anything about authentication and and security and and adversary models for when
somebody tries to gain this new system uh and you know you
don't want to do what the web unfortunately is which was
filled with it and then move on to security off to the
outside so have you thought about that yeah i mean i think
that's what that's what app proto can be so good
for if you're going to tie this oh yeah yeah so
the so the question is uh what do you do about security
what do you do about attempts to game the system um that
have been tried with the current version of publishing uh that um
that people will will eventually try in this system as well um
so having this uh persistent identifier for you and your history of
work i think goes a long way seeing the extent to which
your work is reproduced by others in other contexts and having
that be a signal that some communities elevate i think will will
help a lot as well and for us having the sharing be
with your trusted communities who you have a social connection to through
conferences etc makes it more likely that you will have some social
cohesion as you uh eventually share to a public platform with
with that that lacks context but i think having these expanding circles
of of communities and and trusts who are genuinely interested in addressing
the research question together has been a missing part in the first
generation of platforms and sharing yeah i think one one one thing
that i'll maybe add to that is even or like if
we're looking at some of these sort of attacks today are
like hallucinated references that are just like completely made up and
in this better network like where you can actually like hover over
something and see if that thing exists like that just that like
better formats like wipes out a whole sort of side of the
attack and then i think again leaning on some of the expertise
that has built up in the social media space around moderation and
and that side i think that is more mature than what is
in the scientific space right now okay